docs: add how-to for working with raw sql strings (#7150)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/how-to/extending/sql.qmd

> # Working with raw SQL strings

Author: > Using SQL strings with Ibis

That seems good! Thanks!

> While Ibis is all about avoiding raw SQL strings, there are few reasons you
> might need to use them:

Reviewer: Not sure if I'd want to say Ibis is "all about avoiding raw SQL". How about:

```suggestion
While Ibis generally lets you avoid writing SQL, there are a few use cases where
you might  want to intermingle SQL and Ibis:
```

Author: I am trying to set the stage for the remaining content.

I want the reader to be thinking about raw SQL strings, not juggling general versus specific notions of what ibis can or cannot do.

I don't think we need to use language that preserves our right to state "avoiding raw SQL isn't the only thing ibis does".

Author: Reworded this. LMK what you think!

- You're porting a large amount of existing code and need to get it working
  quickly without rewriting it all to ibis expressions
- You need to access functionality that isn't yet available in a public Ibis
  API

> - You need to access functionality that is may never exist in Ibis such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You need to access functionality that may never exist in Ibis, such as
```

Author: Thanks!

  extremely backend-specific DDL.
- Your colleague has decided to give a you a big pile of SQL for which you

>   simply can't even.

Reviewer: I think levity is fine to an extent, I'm just trying to avoid language that might not translate well/be clear to others that lack the same background. To someone not familiar with that slang this reads like a typo.

- You're in a flow state and you can't be bothered to figure out how the SQL

>   your brain generates is spelled in Ibis.

Author: I'd like to keep this. Our documentation doesn't need to read like a medical textbook :)

>   your brain generates is spelled in Ibis.

Author: Though, if you feel strongly about it I am happy to change it!

      FROM penguins
      GROUP BY 1, 2
      """
   )
   .filter(_.bill_mad > 2)
   .alias("big_bills")  # note the alias call for subsequent '.sql' calls
   .sql("SELECT * FROM big_bills ORDER BY 3 DESC")
)
```

### Working with different SQL dialects

You can also pass SQL strings from SQL dialects that do not match the backend
you're using by passing a dialect name to the `dialect` argument of `.sql`.

For example, here's MySQL syntax running against DuckDB (note the use of
backticks for quoting).

```{python}
(
   t.sql(
      """
      SELECT
        `species`,
        `island`,
        mad(`bill_length_mm`) AS bill_mad
      FROM `penguins`
      GROUP BY 1, 2
      """,
      dialect="mysql",
   )
   .filter(_.bill_mad > 2)
   .alias("big_bills")  # note the alias call for subsequent '.sql' calls
   .sql("SELECT * FROM big_bills ORDER BY 3 DESC")  # <1>
)
```

1. By default the dialect is the backend's native dialect.

This feature is useful if you're porting existing SQL from one backend to
another.

## `Backend.sql`

There's also the `Backend.sql` method, which can handle arbitrary `SELECT`
statements as well and return's an Ibis table expression.

> The main difference with `Table.sql` is that `Backend.sql` **can only refer to

Author: It doesn't, and I don't really feel like writing the code to do it right now.

tables that already exist in the database**, because the API is defined on
`Backend` instances.

After the `Backend.sql` call, however, you're able to mix and match similar
to `Table.sql`:

```{python}
(
   con.sql(
      """
      SELECT
        species,
        island,
        mad(bill_length_mm) AS bill_mad
      FROM penguins
      GROUP BY 1, 2
      """
   )
   .filter(_.bill_mad > 2)
   .alias("big_bills")  # note the alias call for subsequent '.sql' calls
   .sql("SELECT * FROM big_bills ORDER BY 3 DESC")
)
```

::: {.callout-tip}

> ## `Backend.sql` also supports the `dialect` argument.

Reviewer: This callout doesn't feel actionable for the user - what is the `dialect` argument and why might they want to use it? A brief description or example here would be helpful IMO.

Author: I discuss it above in `Table.sql`

:::

## `Backend.raw_sql`

At the lowest level there's `Backend.raw_sql` which is for those situations
where you need to run arbitrary SQL--like a `CREATE` statement--that cannot be

> modeled as a table expression.

Author: I talk about it at the end. Is that sufficient?

> modeled as a table expression.

Reviewer: I saw that. I think it would flow better to hear what the method does and returns, then see the example.

> modeled as a table expression.

Author: I adjusted it and added a description of what `Backend.raw_sql` does. LMK if it needs any more adjustments!
